Uh my name is uh Siddhartha Mukherjee.
Um I have an I'm an MD and uh I have a
PhD a DPhil in
immunology. Uh I'm currently an
associate professor of medicine uh in
the oncology division at Columbia
University.
Who are some important mentors early in
your career?
Uh so I had uh two uh
three uh incredibly close early
scientific mentors and then I had
mentors later.
Um the first and the most important uh
was Paul Berg. Uh
this was I was an undergraduate at
Stanford uh University and at in my
second year I joined Paul Berg's lab as
an undergraduate. Um Paul um
was and is um
an incredibly
uh
influential uh geneticist uh one of the
pioneers of of uh modern genetics.
Um his discoveries are legion but um
when I had joined Paul's lab this was in
1993-94
um we were coming off the end of a very
important series of discoveries which
Paul had played a very crucial role in.
Um and that of course was the capacity
to create recombinant DNA to stitch
together two pieces of DNA uh
piece from a virus a piece from a
bacteria
piece from a bacteria piece from a
mammal uh into one uh
piece of DNA
uh using bacterial enzymes
um and had begun to create the
recombinant DNA revolution
uh allowing us to basically change
genetic code by stitching together two
separate pieces of DNA which came from
different animals or from different
parts of the genome. Um, this had led as
you very well know
to a a series of
important ethical questions because for
the first time we were managing we had
managed we had opened up the capacity to
make synthetic pieces of DNA synthetic
piece of genetic code which were unlike
anything found in nature.
As I said you could stitch together
genetic code from a bacterium and a
genetic code from a virus. Um, and the
possibilities of being able to
manipulate genes was enormous.
This led to a
an enormous public interest but also
public fears around what had happened
and Paul was a
central in creating the Asilomar
conference. Um, and
a conference which addressed Asilomar II
which addressed concerns public concerns
and questions about what to do now that
this technology was has had become
available. Um, so Paul's lab when I
joined Paul's lab
I was working extensively with
recombinant DNA and with the new
technologies around recombinant DNA and
in my case putting them into yeast cells
and to mammalian cells to figure out how
to mix and match pieces of DNA together
to make them work in yeast and mammalian
cells. So Paul was a very early mentor
and what's interesting about Paul is not
only was he a mentor as a scientist but
he also opened my eyes to the potential
ethical and clinical concerns safety
concerns clinical concerns around
genetics and the modification of genes.
Concerns will of which will of course
echo over time
um as we go along. So, this is now 1990
uh '3 '94. Um my second uh major early
mentor was at Oxford where I went to
pursue my PhD,
my DPhil, and that was Alan Townsend.
Um
Alan had uh solved an incredibly
important problem in immunology. He'd
helped solve an incredibly important
problem in immunology with many
colleagues. But, the problem was um it's
very simply stated, which is
uh if you have a uh a cell that's
infected by a virus, and the virus is
sitting within the cell,
um its DNA or its RNA is inside the
cell, um how can a T cell possibly
recognize the infected cell? Because the
contents of the virus, the uh
uh
the DNA or the RNA, is sitting inside,
uh how can a T cell uh recognize
something that it can't see? Because the
cell, the infected cell, is uh
uh visible to the T cell, but only its
outside is visible to the T cell. So, it
was a kind of uh you know, how do you
scan the inside of a cell problem. And
Alan had solved it partially by making
the discovery that viruses uh sorry,
that uh cells um have an uh
have an innate molecular apparatus by
which they pick up the contents uh
made by these viral uh genes.
Um they pick up these contents, broken
down pieces of these contents, peptides,
and uh display them uh like molecular
tags
uh on their cell surface. It's a very
specialized system to do this, a series
of molecular steps that allows
essentially a cell to take its innards
and display them uh on its surface as if
saying, you know, this is what I contain
uh within me and if that can happens to
be from a foreign
invader like a virus or a microbe, then
the T cell can sense it
and thereby kill the infected cell. So,
Paul and Alan
were very influential to me for
different reasons. Paul because he
introduced me to the ideas around
genetic engineering, recombinant DNA,
cloning and
its potential applications and the
ethical concerns.
Alan
was worked on a problem that was much
more close to
human problem. Why do infections get
cleared? How does one obtain immunity?
And and Alan really pushed me towards
thinking more about medicine,
which is where I of course
mainly have my the center of my work.
There were two people who came later.
Um
Um one was Connie Cepko and I should say
Connie worked very closely with a
geneticist Cliff Cliff Tabin. Um Connie
and Cliff
were both at Harvard. I went to medical
school there and they were interested in
develop problems of development.
In Connie's case, how does the nervous
system develop?
How does the retina develop in
particular? Um
and she was a cell biologist
and so from Connie
I learned how to do a technique that I
still use today called lineage tracing.
But the questions there were, you know,
how does a single cell become you? Um
so, it was again you think about this as
a kaleidoscope.
Paul thinking about recombinant DNA and
DNA, Alan thinking about some of the
clinical problems of of DNA
I the
uh of of of human diseases.
Connie and Cliff thinking about how DNA
becomes actualized. So, you have a long
genome,
uh but it's inert uh without being
actualized into making diverse kinds of
cells, and those diverse kinds of cells
have to make a retina, they have to make
a brain, they have to make your fingers.
How does all of this unfold in space and
time?
Um
And so, the you know, Connie came Connie
I was in Connie's lab and again took on
projects that had to do with uh solving
this kind of, you know, how does the
genome become
uh a person, um an animal,
uh an organ.
And finally, um I should mention David
Scadden. Um uh I started working with
David Scadden. David was a hematologist,
um and he was of all these people the
closest to the clinic. Um he was uh
creating trials. David was involved in
uh
working very closely with stem cells, uh
blood-forming stem cells, hematopoietic
stem cells, and that is what and he had
made some fundamental discoveries about
how hematopoietic stem cells live inside
bone marrow.
Um and so, he brought me to problems uh
which were now directly adjacent to
patients, you know, can we do gene
therapy with uh blood stem cells? Um how
could we What were the ethical and
safety concerns with those kinds of
therapies? How does one actually bring
this to human practice, which is where
I, you know, the the area that I sit in
today.
When did you first hear of the Human
Genome Project? What were your initial
thoughts?
The I heard very much about the Human
Genome Project because it was very
richly discussed in in Paul's lab. Um
Paul had been
very closely involved along with many
other people,
obviously Jim Watson, Wally Gilbert, um
uh
John Sulston, um
virtually, you know, Francis Collins,
virtually
this idea had started coalescing of a
kind of consortium, um as it were, of
trying to not just sequence single genes
or two genes or five genes, but the
entire human genome. Um
so, around '93 is when I first even
heard the word Human Genome Project. I
was then unaware of the private effort
and the public effort and how these
would intersect and and coalesce and
compete.
Um so, I was very unaware. I would say
by about the late '90s uh was when it
was very clear uh what the project
looked like was or was was looking like.
Uh there was widespread newspaper
coverage by then. Um and by the time I
was in Alan's laboratory, um it was very
much something that um at Oxford uh very
much something that we spoke about. Um
you know, just to give you a sense of of
of how important it had already become
to us, um these this T-cell problem
um has to do with um
uh specialized molecules um uh
called in humans uh labeled with the
word HLA,
uh human leukocyte antigen, or MHC,
major histocompatibility complex, those
complicated words, but really is a set
of genes um carried in the in in in
cells, which allows um uh these peptides
uh from viruses to be presented on the
surface of cells. This is a an an
incredibly important part of the genome
uh because it determines whether your
tissue can be transplanted into mine,
whether your bone marrow can be
transplanted into mine. Um but it was
also a a very tough part of the genome
to sequence
uh for various structural reasons. Um
There's lots of repeats, there's lots of
elements in in in in that part of the
genome.
So, it's its importance to us
as a solution to be able to scan a
genome and to figure out where these
genes lived,
where they came from in evolution, what
they did, what functions they had, etc.
And how those functions to what extent
the words was encoded or or determined
by where they were located in the
genome.
All of these questions were very very
relevant to the work we were doing, we
were doing and continue to do. As
I thought more and more about bone
marrow transplantation,
a field that I would eventually
really become the center of
of of what I worked on,
these the genes that allow us
to do transplantation across one from
one human to another for conditions such
as leukemia and other diseases
became of crucial importance. So, the
Human Genome Project was not an
abstraction anymore by the mid-90s. It
was a reality, it was a necessity. We I
we needed that information
to try to solve some of the thorniest
problems that we were trying to solve in
in in Allen's lab.
Tell us how you came to write The
Emperor of All Maladies.
Yeah, so I came to it I would say a
little bit backwards.
So, I'll tell you
I'll tell you the story of the journey
that that unfolded.
Um
You know, when I was at Stanford, I was
in Paul's lab
um
and one could say that there was there
were these echoes of
what it meant what the public discourse
around science meant and it was really
inspired by Paul talking extensively
about Asilomar
and what it had done to him as a
scientist, as a thinker, as an
intellectual. Um
we would have lab meetings.
Um sometimes we would have lab retreats,
sometimes we would So in fact uh the
first lab retreat that I went to was at
Asilomar. Uh it turned out that, you
know, the lab still used Stanford, still
used Asilomar as its site. So I had this
strange and and wonderful opportunity uh
when I went in 1994, I think, or 1995,
um I had a poster um as an undergraduate
in the Asilomar retreat. But then Marion
Dixson, uh who had been Paul's assistant
research assistant and really a a
phenomenal researcher in her own right,
um
and Paul, uh
you know, we walked me through Asilomar
saying, "Oh, you know, this is the
building
where the
the worst argument broke out around
between the journalists and the um and
and the scientists. Here is where we
signed uh you know, this document. This
was where, you know, we stayed up all
night eating Chinese food,
um you know, trying to write uh what
would become one of the central
documents of Asilomar. There was, you
know, the graduate students uh were were
were there. Here was, you know, uh Jim
Watson Here's this is where Jim Watson
stood up and said, you know, let's do
this
etc." So it was a
a kind of visual tour, as it were, of
history. Um and echoing in the back of
my mind was, you know, this story is
it's got to be told somehow. This story
is so important, so moving, so crazy, so
powerful, um
and has such public impact that it has
to be told. But I wasn't in a position
to tell it or write it. Um
so
I then went on to Oxford, um but this
kind of echoed public discourse around
science echoed kept echoing in the back
of my head. Um
at Oxford I was a nose-to-the-ground PhD
student, you know, solving problems,
trying to write my thesis.
But at the end of when I finished my
thesis, again, this this kind of old
idea
uh
that this story this this story needs to
be told. These stories need to be told
uh more publicly came back to me. So
when I came to medical school, um this
was in 2000
7,
um
I first began to start writing. Um and
you I started small. Um
I wrote for The New Republic, uh The New
York Times, um
usually smaller things. I was learning
medicine, learning clinical medicine,
and most of
these
first ideas were around sort of the
life's life the life of a medical
student, the life of medicine. Um I
remember writing a piece about resident
hours. I remember reviewing um
um
books that had to do with
with with medicine for the for the for
for the Times and for the Times
magazine.
But the idea of writing a 600-page book
hadn't really occurred to me.
Um I then decided to become an
oncologist
um
and uh started undergoing training as an
oncologist.
And that's where I sort of began to
think that you know, we've thought about
this public discourse. Uh I've been
thinking about how little and how how
little some things are known and how
important they are. Um
and so I began to think that should be
the story should be told. And that was
the inception as I was went through my
fellowship in in oncology, that was the
inception of The Emperor of All
Maladies, the first book on cancer. And
that book really started out as a
journal. Um I was keeping a journal. I
would write every day at the end of
rounds, at the end of uh my day, and
slowly began to grow, and grew out of a
patient's question. The patient
asked me, you know, I was giving a woman
um a new
trial for uh chemotherapy,
and she said, "Where am I going? And and
and and what are we doing?" Um
and it was sort of a
kind of a
a a cry from the heart, you know, of
desperation, but also a philosophical
question, you know, cancer is was and is
one of the most talked about words in
the English language. You can't open a
newspaper without encountering the word
cancer somewhere. Um and yet its history
was unknown. Its story was unknown.
There was no biography, as it were, of
cancer, and that's was the inception of
of The Emperor of All Maladies.
For you, what makes cancer such a
fascinating subject?
Well, I think it's not only for me, I
think very broadly speaking, the public
perceives cancer as an exceptional
disease. Um it is partly because we have
pitted the best of our minds, the best
minds of our generation, against it, and
we have
had sobering success um
against cancer. Um it was for a while,
it was the second most feared word in
the English language after shark. Um
um
and um I don't work on sharks. So, uh
the the the public fear
of the disease, the
the the fact that we had pitted our the
most brilliant minds of our generation
against it,
the fact that it had yielded important
um insights,
um and certainly treatments and cures,
but and yet it was sort of was
unreachable and had remained outside
conquest. Um is a
was you know, is is the essential story
is like you know,
the man battling the bear story. Uh it
is it is the man it is humans Primal. Uh
it there is a very primal quality about
the about
the story. It is the you know, humans
battling the unknown in in in a cave. Um
so I think all of these elements make it
um one of the most fascinating stories
of the
20th and 21st century.
Why do you think our progress combating
cancer has been so sobering?
Well, there are many insights
um
about why the progress has been has been
sobering. Well, first let's identify the
fact that there has been progress.
There's no doubt about it.
Um cancer mortality has fallen about 1%
every every year for the last 20 odd
years. That translates into 20 25%
decrease in cancer-related mortality. Um
First of all, there is it's not one
disease but many diseases. It's almost a
cliche, but um but
the idea that you know, you don't have
one magic bullet solution to cancer um
has become very clear. So
some cancers have become extraordinarily
tractable to prevention and treatment.
Um prevention, early detection, and
treatment. Um breast cancer is a good
example where um
uh treatment has made an enormous
difference. Uh there is certainly uh
early detection with modest success. Um
and uh but not a lot of you know, there
is some prevention especially these days
now that we know people with genetic
susceptibilities for breast cancer, we
we've been able to do launch successful
prevention campaigns particularly
focused on people with genes such as
BRCA1 and BRCA2.
Um on the other hand pancreatic cancer
particularly in its advanced form
um has remained doggedly resistant to
treatment. So the diversity of cancers
is one reason that has been it's been
very sobering.
Um the word magic bullet has never
turned out to be either a bullet or
magic um and so that's been a very
sobering uh realization.
Um and second I think
it was very clear early on that the
campaign against cancer would be built
like a pyramid. The bottom of the
pyramid would be prevention then there
would be early detection and the top of
the pyramid would be treatment. Um
in the last decade or so um we made
at first an enormous uh success in
prevention basically by eliminating
cigarette smoking as a major carcinogen
and then you know
finding uh things
finding viruses that cause cancer such
as the human papillomavirus and creating
vaccines against them. So these were
very successful efforts.
But then in the last 10 odd years I
think to some extent it's been sobering
to realize that the number of chemical
carcinogens with large human impact that
we've been able to remove
as much like cigarette smoking was we
were able to diminish we haven't found
so many.
Um
and so the we have had to really rethink
to some extent how to prevent cancer um
in a way that that you know had seemed
maybe
20 30 40 years ago perhaps simpler.
20 30 40 years ago one might have made
the argument that there were a dozen or
so
common carcinogens
um and those and by systematically
removing those dozen or so common
carcinogens, cigarette smoking being one
of them, viruses being some of them,
that we would make enormous strides
against cancer
and that there would be biomarkers,
markers of um
uh of risk that we could find in people
and we could then use whatever tools
that we had to diminish
those those risks. Both of those have
not turned out what have turned out to
be the case, but they have turned out to
be much more sobering than we had
imagined. In contrast, just to give you
a contrast, in in coronary disease, in
heart disease,
um
both had turned out to be true.
So,
it turned out that number one, that it
was for the most part one disease. I
should say all three turned out to be
true.
For the for the most part, it turned out
to be one disease, essentially one
disease, although people could have
arguments about what the pathophysiology
of the disease is, but essentially one
disease.
Number two is that prevention,
primary prevention became possible by
behavioral modification, dietary
modification, and potentially the use of
new series of drugs to lower
cholesterol. Um so, primary prevention
became possible. Um and finally,
the the it became
very clear that there were clear
biomarkers. So, having a you know,
having
high level of a particular form of
cholesterol was a
indicated risk and therefore, you could
be placed on medicine such as aspirin
and for instance, Lipitor to reduce the
risk. Hypertension was a risk, smoking
was a risk and there were other risks
that were familiar risks, family
histories were risks, age is a risk and
so forth. So, you had all sorts of
markers by which you could identify
patients before they had the frank
disease. And if and you could intervene
and change the biology of people before
they had the frank disease. So just to
summarize
all three things, the fact that it was
largely one disease, the fact that it
was
largely that there were behavioral and
other mechanisms of preventing it and
number three that you could identify the
highest risk patients in in in for heart
disease
made that an an enormous clinical
success so much so much so that the
mortality from heart disease as you know
has declined up to 70% if you have the
appropriate access.
In contrast as I said the mortality from
cancer has drip drip drip drip dripped
slowly frustratingly
because it is just the opposite. It is
many diseases
there was aside from some obvious
candidates it was not easy to find
mechanisms of primary prevention
and number three biomarkers of risk
aside from some genetics
and some other exposures the biomarkers
of risk were few and far between. So
exactly what happened in heart disease
in some ways did not happen in cancer
because they're two fundamentally
different illnesses and that's been some
of the frustration and
some extent the challenge of working in
in this field.
How have efforts like the Cancer Genome
Atlas TCGA changed the fight against
cancer?
So in many ways
so again
one could
we could divide this up this question up
systematically.
First of all one should say that the
TCGA
was built on top of the Human Genome
Project so the Human Genome Project
provided the template to build the
Cancer Genome Project allowing us to
figure out what are the genetic changes
in in cancer cells. Um
I should preface this by saying that
this must be known to
your audience, but at its base cancer is
a genetic disease. So, uh and by genetic
disease we mean that cancer
occurs or is caused by mutations in
genes that alter cellular growth,
cellular metabolism, and allow cells to
grow when they're not supposed to grow
and occasionally
don't allow cells to die when they're
supposed to die.
Um these genes
further co-opted uh
mechanism metabolism. They co-opt um
growth pathways such that the cancer
cell grows without uh control. It has no
longer the normal the control that
normal cells have. Uh when you have a
cut in your hand, a wound, it heals but
you don't grow a new hand. That's
because the cells in your hand have a
capacity to grow to fill the wound and
repair the wound, but then uh have also
a capacity to stop growing so that you
still don't have a new hand growing out
of it. In cancer, these pathways because
of mutations in genes, these pathways
are dysregulated so that now you have a
cell that keeps growing or cells that
keep growing. Um
but that brings us to the question or
brought us to the question, what are
these mutations? What are the genes? How
many are there? Is it one in a cancer
cell? Are there 10? Are there 20? What
is the diversity within a cancer? Two
breast cancers, do they have the same
set of genes or do they have different
sets of genes? What is the diversity
across cancers? If you compare breast
cancer to pancreatic cancer, what is the
diversity across cancer? So, the first
thing that the human that the cancer
genome project provided
building on the human genome project was
a answers to these questions. Um how
many genes are mutated in cancers? What
are the genes? What is the identity of
the genes? Um what is the what is the
relationship between, let's say, two
breast cancers? What is the relationship
between breast cancer and pancreatic
cancer or lung cancer? What is the
compendium? What is the encyclopedia of
mutated genes that allow cancers to
behave like cancers? That was a major
and very important
series of
discoveries.
The second was to ask the question, now
that you know these mutated genes, can
you use them to understand how to derive
new therapies?
And that has been
an ongoing project.
That might include those might include
molecules like Gleevec or imatinib which
um
take a particular
product of a cancer gene called BCR-ABL,
the protein BCR-ABL and basically jams
the the function of that protein
enabling it to not function anymore.
Now, BCR-ABL was discovered long before
the Human Genome Project, but the Human
Genome Project put mutations such as
BCR-ABL and others in the context
of the entire human genome.
So, we began to imagine new forms of
therapy
based on our understanding of the
complexity of cancers cancer genomes.
And the third was cancer prevention. So,
and we are this is also an ongoing
effort. Um
Again, based on early efforts to map
genes which eventually would
coalesce into the
Cancer Genome Project, we began to find
genes that increase susceptibilities for
cancer.
These are in fact biomarkers. They're
few and far between that we have.
The gene BRCA1 is one of them. Gene the
gene BRCA2 is one of them.
The Cancer Genome Project again, these
were
found before the full compendium was
reached, but it put these genes in the
context of the human genome
and put the gave us a a
of um
uh really as I said, what the complexity
and what the compendium was.
The
the next step that the phase that we're
in is to take all those
all that material, that these insights
and translate them into prevention,
detection, and cure.
And that's the process that we're
undergoing right now. How do we
interpret the alterations in the cancer
in cancer genes and mutations? You know,
a breast cancer could have
has millions of cells, but you know,
could have 130 mutations.
Um
uh
whereas other cancers maybe have only
one or two mutations.
Um how can two mutations drive
the
physiology of a cancer cell? What
happens when you have 100 mutations?
Um how do the
So so really
the Cancer Genome Project, building on
the Human Genome Project, closed a
certain set of questions. How many genes
are there? What are there? What is their
identity? What do the mutations look
like? But opened a new set of questions.
Which is how do these genes make
cancer's abnormal behavior happen? Uh
what is the physiology of cancer?
And and now we've gone on to yet another
set of questions. Now that we've
understood the physiology of cancer,
we're asking how's the physiology of
cancer related to the physiology of the
host. So
immunotherapy is that third set of
questions. So
we really think about all of these as
sequential steps. Um eventually always
asking the same question, which is how
do we take
the genome
and use that to understand better ways
of preventing cancer,
better ways of detecting cancer early.
For instance, you know, you might find a
way to detect cancer by genes that are
shed in the blood. It's a very common
theme uh these days.
And thereby detect cancer in its early
phases. And finally, treatment. You
know, how can we understand the how the
genes make cancer behave abnormally? How
can we understand how the cancer
interacts with the host's uh cells?
Again, the host genome and the cancer
genome
juxtaposed against each other or
interacting with each other through
cells. Um and how can we thereby drive
new kinds of treatment?
Do you think of the HGP and TCGA as
question-generating enterprises? How are
they distinct from other types of
scientific inquiry?
Oh, I absolutely think of the Human
Genome Project and the Cancer Genome
Atlas as a question-generating
enterprise.
Um
you know, and I think
we would not have embarked on it uh if
it was not a question-generating
enterprise. In this sense, it's very
different, fundamentally different from
things that it's been compared to. So,
it's been often compared to the
Manhattan Project. It's been compared to
the Apollo Project. But here is uh and
and I've written about this extensively.
It's a fundamentally different. The
Manhattan Project was not a
question-generating enterprise. It was
an answer-generating enterprise. Can you
split an atom and cause a bomb detonate
a bomb?
That is not a question. It is an answer.
It raises certain questions,
uh but they it doesn't raise
fundamental questions. It It answers
questions.
It is an engineering project.
Um
the
moon landing
uh also uh is not a question-generating
enterprise. It is an answer-generating
enterprise. It It It is driven by when
you land on the moon, you've landed on
the moon. You've done something
concrete. Uh
it shows that, you know, you If you ask
the question, "Can human beings land on
the moon?" you can say, "Yes, they can."
Uh
we did. And of course, it generates a
small number of questions.
The Human Genome Project and the Cancer
Genome Atlas should not be viewed really
because if they're viewed as the
Manhattan Project and the Apollo
Project, then the public says, "Well,
what do we get out of it?"
Um what are the answers? Um but really
should be seen as template projects.
They should be seen as question
generating projects. And what we are
seeing out of it is the answers to those
questions. The answers to those
questions are can we prevent cancer?
That the question is, you know, what
does the Human Genome Project tell us or
the Cancer Genome Project tell us about
how to prevent or treat a cancer. So,
I've tried very hard in this kind of
long discourse to make
a very simple distinction
between question generating projects and
answer generating projects, hypothesis
generating projects and hypothesis
proving projects. Uh
the
Human Genome Project and the Cancer
Genome Atlas lie very much in the
hypothesis generating arm or the
hypothesis generating
arena
of of the scientific enterprise. The
Manhattan Project and uh the Apollo
Project lie very much closer to the
hypothesis closing aspects of these
enterprise. Of course, that's not
absolutely true, but uh for the most
part um and and I think it's very
important
uh for the public discourse around
science to be able to distinguish these
two things.
Because if they cannot, then you mix up
uh these two ideas and then you ask the
wrong kinds of questions. You ask the
question, "What did I get out of it?"
Right? Um you know, well, you know, out
of the Manhattan Project or out of the,
you know, you got a bomb that um some
people might say brought the war to an
end.
So, what do I get out of it? That's a
very concrete answer.
What do I get out of the Human Genome
Project? I would say we get a whole
bunch of interesting questions.
And if you didn't realize that that was
the purpose
of the Human Genome Project, or was one
of the purposes of the Human Genome
Project, you as a taxpayer, as the
public, as a journalist, as a writer, as
a thinker, might feel disappointed. You
could say, "What did I get out of it?"
Well, I got a a whole bunch of questions
out of it. And you would say, "Well, did
I Did I pay all this money to get these
effort put these brilliant minds to work
to get questions?" And you And some
people might say that That's really
disappointing. But to me as a scientist,
it's fundamentally important to explain
that these are two different ideas. They
have
different aims. Um
and once you know if you know that they
have different aims, all of a sudden you
say,
"That's very interesting. I got a whole
series of questions out of it. And those
questions, when we answer those
questions, as we answer those questions,
we will find new treatments for not just
diseases like cancer, but of course
illnesses in general, and understand the
human body in a fundamentally different
way."
Given that, how do you contextualize
personalized medicine?
So,
that has been again, that had that has
The question was posed that now that we
have
the capacity to sequence human genomes,
how much do we have now the capacity to
personalize medicine for an individual
disease or an individual cancer?
Um
the answer turned out to be um
somewhat but not very much
uh for certain diseases. Um and the
answers are still emerging.
So, what have we learned? Well, we've
learned some very important lessons.
One, we've learned that
most common human diseases uh
hypertension, heart disease, breast
cancer um
and others um are the risks for them are
not contained in a single gene, but
really in tens of genes, thousands of
genes, even tens of thousands of genes
um for most common human diseases. There
are certainly rarer human diseases where
a single mutation uh in a gene uh will
uh cause a disease or greatly increase
your chance of having a disease. Cystic
fibrosis is one of them.
Um
There are many others. Sickle cell
anemia is one of them.
Um
Huntington's disease uh is yet another
one. Um
but for common human diseases um
some of which I named, we've discovered
that in fact the uh
for for most humans uh the genetics of
the genomics is is quite complicated and
therefore delivering precision medicine
isn't going to be a first-order problem.
It isn't going to be a kind of match as
it were, a jigsaw puzzle in which the
genome will match a medicine and you'll
put these two things together and all of
a sudden boom, you'll get the treatment
uh for for a particular disease. It has
turned out to be more complex. Um so the
question that it asked was
is it possible
to use um
genetic information to go from genes to
medicine
um in a in a in a in a in a simple
manner?
And the answer is for
genes where the uh where the genetics is
simple,
uh the prediction of risk is simpler,
the capacity to to diagnose is simpler,
uh
the potential to intervene uh has
we've now begun to see um attempts to
intervene uh that have been successful.
But for most human diseases, it has
turned out that the genetics or the
genomics is complex.
Um the match between the genes and the
medicines is not one-to-one.
And uh we we are still trying to figure
out the extent to which we can match
these complex genetic uh
uh uh,
susceptibilities or vulnerabilities to
the appropriate medicine. Um, and that
has been That's the answer to the
question.
How do you define the public and
effectively communicate scientific
inquiry to that public?
Well, I mean, I have some fundamental
First of all,
I think you never underestimate the
public.
These are people who have have
you know, it is it is their generosity
to some extent our generosity, their
generosity that has sustained this
institute, that has sustained the
you know, decades-long project to
investigate and uh, human diseases and
to emancipate us from illness and
suffering. So, uh,
and the public, as you know, however you
define it, however broadly you define
it, has fundamentally always supported
the mission of the National Institutes
of Health and that there should be a
national health program. Um,
so, uh, research program. So, um,
what does the public mean? Well, the
public is very broad. It has very It has
very broad sense, you know, you you
range from people with deep interest in
health literacy to people who have no
interest in health literacy. Access is
complicated, educational levels are
complicated, socioeconomic levels are
very wide, there are racial disparities
which are we in health. So, the public
is not one public, there are many
publics. Um,
how does one speak to that that public?
Well, first of all, as I said, never
underestimate. And I think the
fundamental rule is is that one should
be able to communicate the central goals
of a project, any project, scientific
project, um, in a way that's
understandable
to a, um,
what I I sort of I would say to a fifth
grader.
Um, not because the public has a fifth
grader's intellect, but your capacity as
a communicator of science should be so
simple
that, um,
that someone who is generally able to
speak and understand language in
with some some degree of complexity
should be able to understand why you're
doing the project. This was
epitomized by my
you know, by Gary Gilliland, another one
of my mentors, a leukemia biologist,
who basically said that if you're a
graduate student and you cannot explain
your project to your grandfather or your
grandmother
and in in two sentences or less and have
them figure out why it's important, then
you're doing something wrong. Um it's
not that you're communicating wrong,
it's something wrong with your project.
Um it's it is it is too complicated,
it's not worth it, it's not worthwhile,
it's maybe it requires simplification,
you your brain requires some
simplification. It's not that they It's
not that the the recipients of the
information have the problem, it's
actually the giver of the information
the problem and it's not a communication
problem per se. It's not as if you
It is the problem that things are
muddled in your head. Um and and if
they're muddled in your head, they'll
they're they'll be muddled as you go
through what you're doing in the lab. So
um
and so
you know, this
you know, this could be
this basically it it it it it
turns out to be
a mechanism by which you know, your
father, your mother, your fifth grader,
your family member
around Thanksgiving table
um
should be able to understand what you're
doing and why you're doing it in two
sentences or three sentences. Um they
may not get the micro details, they
might not get the technical details, but
they should be able to understand it and
that's the kind of public you want to be
able to reach.
Um
never underestimate,
never patronize, never
uh
soften,
but you should be able to describe the
essential goals of what you're trying to
do
in a way that's intelligible
to someone who understands the the the
basic
instruments of language.
What role do you think scientists should
fill within the public discourse?
Well, they have many roles. I mean, you
know,
they are to some extent the ex perts.
So, they have roles to ensure that the
knowledge is dis- that the correct
knowledge is dispensed and dispersed. Uh
that false knowledge, which is false
news, which abounds today, is not
dispersed and is contained and is
refuted. Uh
and it can only be refuted, as I said,
with
without using technicalities.
Technicality is actually the friend of
false knowledge. Uh
technical speak is the friend of false
knowledge or false news because you can
hide behind words, you can hide behind
technical words even more than anything
else. So, I think that I think, you
know, we
have a responsibility, um
as I said, as as we move along in
various things that we're doing within
the realm of research and
health, one of the responsibilities is
to be able to communicate that
effectively, to refute false news, um
and sometimes the false news might be a
disagreement with another scientist. Uh
to be able to refute that
and do it in a manner that's civil and
based on evidence. Science communication
around science, like science itself, has
to do with evidence. Bring evidence and
and create a civil argument around
evidence. I mean, this seems to have
been
lost in this last
5 years or so, but but that is the basis
and it's been going on in the in the
discourse in science for centuries.
How did you decide to write The Gene: An
Intimate History?
Well, at the end of
the book on cancer,
the question that's raised at the end of
the book on cancer is cancer cells are
abnormal.
Uh
how does normalcy happen? What is
normalcy? Um and by normalcy, I don't
mean a kind of um
you know, I don't mean a kind of moral
definition of normalcy. I mean, how do
cells develop? How do we not have
cancer? Um what makes our bodies
develop? I mean, to some extent, I was
going through
um the my my scientific mentors. Um
the book on cancer really came out of my
fellowship. Um
the book on on genetics and genomics
went backwards uh to to people like Paul
um and to people like Connie and
Sepkoski and and Cliff Tabin
uh who were asking fundamental questions
not about cancer but about you know, how
does what do genes look like? Um how can
we manipulate them?
Uh how do genes make organisms
uh
develop, come out, become real? Um so,
it it it it was a kind of going
backwards uh
uh to some extent. And it was also
motivated by a very personal story, the
history of mental illness in my family
where there was and still is a suspected
genetic link. Schizophrenia and bipolar
um bipolar disease that has crossed
several generations in my family where
there where there is a genetic link.
There's certainly environmental links,
but there but that there is a genetic
link. So,
that's why it's called an intimate
history um
and
um
and so, that's how the second book came
to be realized.
Why is genetic information an important
topic for you?
Well, it's it's it's the idea of of how
essential it is and how private it is
and how personal it is. Uh it is the
most intimate information we have. Uh it
belongs to us in a way that no other
really information belongs to us because
it's writ into ourselves. It is writ
into our
you know, we use the word writ into DNA
in popular uh
as a popular phrase, but in this case it
is literally writ into DNA.
Um
I think there is an uh you know, a kind
of essentializing quality about it. We
find it it's essential to you. It is
private to you. It belongs to you. Um
Your exposures, your environment, your
experiences um
somehow are
choices that you make. Um
But the genome is what you're handed,
what you're given. These ideas go back
in history to people like Rousseau and
other philosophers, you know,
what is the
what is the tabula rasa? What is the
table that you begin with? What is the
blank slate that you begin with? And the
genome, your genome is the slate that
you begin with. You begin with it before
you have your first experience, before
you make your first choice, before you
do your first activity.
Um it is uh
it is inside you. Um
And therefore the level of privacy, uh
the level of
uh
personhood, uh level of intimacy that
you have associated with it
metaphorically, culturally,
biologically, socially uh
remains exceptional. Um
And I think there are people who have
argued against this very successfully
saying, you know, your genome doesn't
determine you.
Um and most people who are thoughtful
about genetics would say, yes, there is
a component in which
genes uh
determine who you are,
uh but there are large
interplays between genes and your
environment. There's a large interplay
between genes and chance. Uh
you know, if you have
an accident and break a leg,
that is not a genomic event. Uh
but it will has enormous consequences
for may have enormous consequences for
your life and your fate and your choices
and your decision. So, to think of human
fate and and human destiny entirely in
gene gene and genetic and genomic terms
is clearly false, but also clearly a
fallacy.
Um
But on the other hand, to not think of
human destiny um and choice and
um
and and future in terms of
genomes is also false. Um and so so
part of the education
uh around the idea of of of
what genes do, how they work, uh how
they make us how they don't make us,
um is to draw that line and to
understand that it's genes plus
environment plus chance plus triggers
that ultimately results in human
phenotype, human
fate, human destiny, human choices, et
cetera.
How does the HGP figure into the debates
over genetic determinism?
Well, it was not the human gene I think
to the I don't think it was a human
genome project's task to address either
the intimacy or the or or to resolve
genetic determinism.
Um I think the human genome's task was
project's task was to sequence the human
genome. As we sequenced the human
genome, we found out what we somewhat
knew, but really found out in real
terms, that human beings are
very similar to each other genetically,
but we also contain differences from
each other. And these differences are
responsible for differences between you
and me and have consequences for our
bodies, have consequences for illness,
and have consequences for our destiny.
As I said, they're not the only things
that
have consequences, environment, chance,
fate, and so forth. So, I don't think it
was a Human Genomes Project's project to
solve or unsolved genetic determinism.
Genetic determinism existed before the
Human Genome Project and will exist
after the Human Genome Project. It is a
part of how humans think of genes.
The Human Genome Project illustrated
that we are very similar to each other
and that there in some ways we have
critical differences between each other.
Um and it basically um allowed us to
deepen the discourse about these
similarities and differences
and raise the question, as I said, it's
a question-raising enterprise. It is the
question, you know,
to what extent are we determined by
genes? And the answer has has had been
clear for a long time. The answer had
been that, you know, it is it is a
flawed and foolish thing to say
that human destiny or fate or human
beings are entirely genetically
determined or, you know, strong genetic
determinism is a flawed idea.
A weak genetic determinism is a flawed
idea. Somewhere in between
uh
lies the truth.
How should scientists approach ethical
concerns over determinism arising from
social genomic?
Well, the first word is cautiously. Um
and um
thoughtfully. Um
And the second
idea is again to try to hold
one's sense of balance
uh against this powerful new wave of
genetic determinism.
Uh
as we associate SNPs and other things
with
complex, socially complex, um ideas.
Educational achievement,
um
uh
sexual orientation, um
we are witnessing a kind of revivalist
um phase of genetic determinism. If you
have these genes, you will be that. Um
so the first thing that needs to be
addressed is that uh
that it that is generally not true. As
as I said, there are exceptions to this
case. If you have a mutation in the
Huntington's disease gene, you will
likely experience that disease in your
lifetime. That is a powerful form of
that is a powerful genetic determinant.
Um in contrast, most complex human
traits
um
uh have genetic determinants behind
them, but are highly modified
uh refracted, as it were,
uh through the lenses of environment,
triggers, chance, and choice. Um such
that when we communicate these ideas to
the public, we have to stand against
this this revivalist buffeting wind of
the new genetic determinism. And the
only way to do that is to do that by
tackling the problem head-on.
Um is to say that there is
uh going on right now.
Um and in fact, the book The Gene ends
here. It it it makes very clear there is
this this wind that is the this this new
buffet that is that that is trying to
knock off
uh really a sober knowledge about how
complex human traits and destinies and
futures
are attained,
uh which is a an intersectional
interaction between genes and
environment. This was known, you know,
since Dobzhansky's days.
Um
but it is important, I think, you now
especially to stand steadfast against
that buffeted wind and to reinforce this
idea that that no one is saying that
your genes are you and you are your
genes and there's a one-to-one map
between one and the other. In rare
circumstances, there is one could
produce such a map, but for most complex
human traits, it's not the case.
How can science communicators help us
avoid deterministic frameworks?
Well, it's it's to emphasize what we've
learned over, you know, the last several
decades that, as I said before, most
complex human traits, some exceptions
aside, are determined by multiplicities
of genes and multiplicities of genes
interacting with environments, chances,
triggers, choices, exposures, et cetera.
So, in other words, you can't create a
an epidemiology of human destiny just by
reading the human genome. Um, in rare
cases, you can create some sense of what
a person's future would look like um,
because those genes, the mutations in
those genes, are so autonomous, so
powerful, that they will swerve your
fate. Um, but those are rare cases. Uh,
the more most common cases are not that.
What most excites you about the future
of genomic medicine?
Well, so we are working on several
aspects of this. I'll tell you the one
thing that's
that we are working on that is very
interesting to me. Um, I treat leukemia.
And um, it's a disease of it's a cancer
of blood cells and really
uh, for the kind of leukemia that I
treat, acute myelogenous leukemia, AML,
we know a lot about the genome. Uh, we
know a lot about the genetic mutations.
But unfortunately, we have not been able
really thus far to be able to target any
of these genetic mutations with drugs,
Um, or match the mutation with the
appropriate kind of drug. There's been a
couple of exceptions to that.
There's a mutation called FLT3, which
there is a drug for it, but again, the
effectiveness has been pretty limited,
and we're using for this disease
drugs that are were made in the 1970s.
One of the approaches that we've taken,
which is a completely novel approach, is
to say, "Well, what if we, instead of
changing so
the
the an amazing capacity in this disease,
in AML, would be to to be able to
distinguish between the cancer cells and
the normal cells, and kill just the
cancer cell and spare the normal cell.
But, whenever we've tried to do that,
we've never found things on the cancer
cell, tags, markers, that were not
present in the normal cell.
So, we've been stuck in this disease
because every time we try to kill the
cancer cell, we'll kill the normal cells
as well, and obviously, you can't do
that because you will very soon reach a
reach a threshold, and you can't cross
that barrier.
And we've struggled and struggled and
struggled against this, and then all of
a sudden, we had this idea that what if,
rather than concentrating on the cancer,
we could use genetic technologies to
change the normal cells,
thereby making the cancer cells unique.
In other words, we would bioengineer a
tag in a cancer cell, which would be
eliminated using genetic techniques such
as CRISPR, from normal cells, thereby
creating a cancer-specific or
cancer-unique
target. Um we developed this in the
laboratory, and we're in launching a
clinical trial. This would not happen if
we didn't have tools like CRISPR at our
disposal. Um so, gene therapy and CRISPR
and various other things at our
disposal.
So, I'm excited about the use of these
tools
to enable novel forms of medicine, which
could not be imagined before these new
genetic and genomic tools were
available. That's one.
The second idea that I'm very interested
in is preimplantation genetic diagnosis.
The idea that you can biopsy
uh
potentially an embryo um and make
decisions first of all figure out
whether they are whether it carries
mutations that are
that cause serious genetic diseases or
serious diseases and choose or not
choose
to implant those
those embryos.
It's a very ethically complicated arena
as you can imagine. Um
lots of debate around it and a lot of
questions that have been raised. You
know, should you know, what should
parents be allowed to choose for? How
much information
should parents be given or can anyone be
given
to make that choice? So, I'm very
interested in that technology and all
its ethical
the debates that follow.
And the third of course is
using tools like such as CRISPR and
others
synthetic DNA etc. to make alterations
in human cells particularly in sperm and
egg cells to alter human genomes
um
potentially for the future.
Um so
if you're talking about sperm and egg
cells to make alterations that will be
carried generation after generation
and this is
again an ethical minefield.
What alterations should be be seeking?
Is how safe are they?
Can it be done technically? So, those
are the three arenas that I think are
most exciting.
How can scientists effectively navigate
and communicate these complex ethical
issues?
Well, first of all one
first thing one does is to learn the
history.
You know, this this idea that we are
coming close or approaching the language
of positive eugenics. First of all, you
have to explain what positive eugenics
is and and what it did and what it was
you know, in the United States not far
away from here. It's not We're not
talking about the atrocities of of
killing uh killings in in in Nazi
Germany. We're talking about
sterilization of the sterilization of
Carrie Buck. We're talking about forced
sterilizations of women, usually, um in
order to prevent genetic diseases based
on very poor science, usually, um and
very poor public um public
understanding. Um so, that's one thing
that the the beginning the migration or
the or the navigation across these
ethical minefields, one begin one has to
talk about history and why why that
history is what what happened, why that
happened, how did we let it happen, um
and what its consequences were.
The second thing I think we we need to
focus on is defining rigid criteria, um
strong criteria, when we about the kind
of information that we that we are
allowed to manipulate and allowed to
have. Um so, for instance,
information about
diseases, where the causal link between
the disease and the gene is very strong,
I give you a couple of examples,
Huntington's disease being one of them,
um is information that might be valuable
to a parent for uh
preimplantation genetic diagnosis. Uh
that that information seems to be seems
to lie in the realm uh where an action
could be justifiably taken. In other
words, you could choose not to implant
an embryo that carried a mutation, which
might cause a lethal neurodegenerative
disease in the future. You may choose
to, but you may not choose to. That
choice might be left to you uh because
no one speaks for the embryo. You, as a
parent, must make that decision.
Whereas, information about complex
traits, where there's chances are you
don't understand the traits, there's
only a propensity, it it is a it is an
accepted part of human diversity.
Um it is a socially accepted part of
human diversity.
Um I think that information is not very
useful. Providing that information only
causes greater confusion
among people. And this is not to take a
paternalistic view of it, but but just
but just and and say, you know, you
can't have that information. But it
should remind us that having that
information and making a choice about
it, making a making an action on it is
not justified because that action is
based on incomplete information. In
information is incomplete. It is It is
never going to be complete.
Uh it is the nature of that information
that it is not deterministic.
Um
I think that information should be
limited.
Uh it should be
uh limited by several mechanisms, but
but limited primarily because as a
scientist, giving you that information
could not and should not cause you to
make an actionable choice because I
cannot tell you in any manner, way, or
way or or scheme the link between that
information and what you hope to achieve
with it, which is a
a kind of
um
a certainty about a future destiny.
Um so So, that's another one. The third
one is is is the is the simplest of all,
and that is that we really limit uh the
information and the choices to diseases
of extraordinary suffering. Um that the
centerpiece of all of this, and this I'm
speaking as a physician, should be
suffering. Um the definition of
suffering, our understanding of
suffering, who suffers
uh because as I said, no one speaks with
the embryo,
um but but but we do have
uh an understanding of suffering, what
suffering means. Um it's a malleable
understanding that it changes over time.
Um and you might decide that uh that a
particular form of suffering isn't
meaningful to you. Uh Um,
you know,
for for a community of of people um,
with
different stature, short-statured people
might decide that it is not a form of
suffering. Um, that um, and that in fact
there is a kind of uh,
there is a a a malignant pa-
patronism
to defining that as a kind of suffering.
Um, so I think the way to navigate these
fields are these the things that I told
you about. Number one is to have a very
public conversation about the definition
of what extraordinary suffering is.
Uh, number two to understand the history
of uh, of positive eugenics and the
closeness that we've had to it
historically in this country. And number
three to be particularly cautious about
information where the genetic where
genetic determinism is weak, but is
likely to be interpreted as strong. Um,
and so I think these are early steps.
Um, I I talk about them in the book. I
call this a triangle.
Um,
I think you know, maintaining yourself
within the triangle, extraordinary
suffering,
strong causal link between gene and
disease, and no other justifiable
alternative um,
is a is a is a triangle that is
kind of a safe zone. Um,
uh, and of course this is superimposed
on on the history of positive eugenics.
You can
if you depart that zone, if you begin to
intervene uh, on something that we don't
consider extraordinary suffering, where
the where the where the where the
questions about extraordinary suffering
are not resolved, um, are very much
still in in in the public realm and in
debate, uh, we begin to depart from from
this triangle.
Mhm.